---
layout: post
author: Bankole
title: Nigeria needs to raise tobacco taxes
discussion_id: 2021-01-09-nigeria_tobacco_taxes
comments: true
---

Tobacco has a high public health cost in Nigeria. More people are smoking,
starting earlier and smoking for longer than ever. As a result, smoking-related
diseases are growing. In addition to the public health costs, Nigeria
under-taxes and under-regulates this industry compared to the west or other
African countries. There's a massive financial and public health benefit in
better regulation of the tobacco industry, and we can get enough in taxes to
manage the public health costs.

Nigeria charges [lower
taxes]("https://www.ictd.ac/publication/economics-tobacco-control-nigeria-modelling-fiscal-health-excise-tax/")
on tobacco, in part due to lower tax rates and *how* it charges taxes. In
addition to import taxes, Nigeria charges tobacco taxes based on the value of
the goods, different from the WHO-recommended tax on retail prices. Even without
low rates, this tax structure is prone to under-valuation and encourages
creation of lower-quality products.

Nigeria charges 20% of the UCA (unit cost) as taxes, down from 40% in 2009. This
is much lower than the WHO-recommended 75% of retail price benchmark, and even
lower than the 50% recommended by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).

What's worse is that cigarettes have become more affordable in the past decade,
when you adjust for income and affordability. This is unacceptable, and unique
to Nigeria. If higher taxes are compelled to lead to higher prices, demand will
drop. People will smoke less, and fewer people will die from smoking-related
diseases.

Nigeria needs the revenues, and is in a position of strength to raise taxes.
Both British American Tobacco (BAT), and Japan Tobacco International (JTI) have
production facilities in Nigeria. BAT controls 80% of the Nigerian market,
serving its West African market out of their Ibadan factory, and Nigeria
continues to be one of the growth and profit drivers for BAT. This does not end
with having the tax laws on the books. We also have a problem with collecting
taxes for the laws we do have, and the abused but well-intentioned tax holidays
for setting up factories.

The prize is high for getting it right. It's a significant revenue opportunity
with a payback period as short as a year, according to some estimates. In 2012,
the Philippines "Sin Tax" law raised tobacco taxes which counter-intuitively
increased revenues and reduced smoking prevalence. This increase in revenue
allows the government to subsidize insurance for more of the population. In
1994, South Africa's increased taxes raised government revenues 100% and dropped
smoking rates 30% in a decade. Why not Nigeria?

This is not a knock on the tobacco industry, at least not for the taxes. It is
reasonable to expect businesses to find ways to reduce their tax bill. These
companies are huge employers of labour, they pay corporate income taxes and
their export revenues are a valuable source of foreign exchange for the
government. However, studies have not seen any evidence that higher tobacco
taxes in countries like Nigeria will lead to job losses. Nigeria can get a "fair
share" of this revenue to deal with the public health impact, and in line with
other countries.

Taxation alone will not address the public health implications. We need to
enforce restrictions on advertising, better notices on packets and other tobacco
control measures. Some Nigerian states are seeking redress in the court system
with court cases as far back as 2007. We need everything. Combined with higher
taxes, Nigeria can increase revenues and reduce the negative public health
impact of smoking.
