---
layout: post
author: Bankole
title: Mayweather, Mourinho and avoiding mistakes
discussion_id: 2021-03-14-avoiding_mistakes
comments: true
---

> *The game is won by the team who commits fewer errors*.
>
> Jose Mourinho

Jose Mourinho and Floyd Mayweather have built successful careers by avoiding
mistakes. Mourinho's teams [concede fewer
goals]("https://premierleaguenewsnow.com/coronavirus-lockdown-series-stats-behind-jose-mourinho-2004-05-chelsea-success/"),
and are famous for  "parking the bus". His [7
rules]("https://www.jefftipping.com/blog/jose-mourinhos-seven-winning-principles")
for winning big games can be summarized simply as "Don't make mistakes". Like
Mourinho, Mayweather's opponents land only 16% of their shots, [less than
half]("https://bleacherreport.com/articles/1135177-floyd-mayweather-is-the-best-of-all-time-according-to-compubox-at-least")
the rate of his last opponent.

They've both gone on to be very successful. Mourinho has won domestic titles in
four different countries and is one of only 3 managers to win the UEFA Champions
League with 2 different teams. Floyd Mayweather is undefeated through 50 fights
and is one of the world's highest paid athletes.

Obviously, this is not the only way to be successful. Muhammad Ali is the
greatest fighter of all time and was not a defensive boxer. Other football
managers play an expansive game that is more beautiful to watch and has led to
as many titles. But, that's not the whole story. Muhammad Ali's greatest fights
are those where he was able to defend well and withstand shots. Guardiola's
Barcelona success is, at least in part, a result of one of the greatest
centre-back pairings of all time. Similarly, he struggled in Manchester City
until he was able to find the right defenders, despite the wealth of attacking
options.

In sports as in life, playing it safe gets a bad rap. Most business advice is
focused on how to win instead of *how not to lose*. Journalists write stories
about George Soros' $1B bet or how Elon Musk invested all his PayPal earnings to
start Tesla and SpaceX. You hear more about the times people take risks and
succeed. You don't hear about all the times people take risks and fail. In any
case, you can't become a hero for "playing it safe". In the case of Mourinho,
you can even become an anti-hero, a cautionary tale. Managers don't get rewarded
for the mistakes they avoid, but for the goals they score.

Yet, playing it safe makes sense. The future is impossible to predict and the
goal is to be "alive" in as many versions of the future as possible. A strong
defense or fall-back plan gives you that. Both Buffett and Munger credit
avoiding mistakes for some of their success. This means they avoid some wins,
but they also reduce their losses and live to fight another day.

Don't believe the hype. Surviving is the only thing that matters. For every
decision, the probability of unacceptable loss should be zero. Only those who
survive can go on to win, whatever that means for you.
