---
layout: post
author: Bankole
title: "Nigeria\u2019s secured lending opportunity"
discussion_id: 2021-07-26-nigeria_secured_lending
comments: true
---

Whoever figures out secured lending for Nigeria can build a billion-dollar
business. Secured lending has worked in other emerging markets, e.g., Brazil
with Creditas, and investors tend to bring business models that work in other
emerging markets to Nigeria. Jumia's existence was foreshadowed by FlipKart
(2009) and Ola(2010) and they share the same investors. Why not Creditas and
Nigeria? Who's building this?

It's not enough to say, "Nigeria is different. Secured lending can't work here"
Rather, it's looking at what the challenges are and whether intrepid
entrepreneurs can overcome them.

## The secured lending opportunity

Secured lending requires borrowers to have collateral and Lenders can claim the
collateral if the borrower defaults. Secured loans have higher approval rates,
lower default rates and are more likely to be paid in an economic downturn.

Whoever you ask, the opportunity is big. By some estimates, consumer loans is
a [NGN10.1T ($24.6B) market
opportunity]("https://dejiolowe.com/2020/04/03/addressing-nigerias-overlooked-lending-opportunities/#:~:text=This%20means%20that%20the,about%20NGN%203.8%20trillion."),
and this most notably excludes small businesses. Moreso, Nigeria's lenders
believe customers want these loans and see demand increasing.

### CREDITAS AS A CASE STUDY

Creditas is a Brazilian fintech that provides customers with loans secured
against a house, car or monthly paycheck. Creditas does not take customer
deposits but instead chooses to build financial products around these 3 assets.
Creditas has no branches; customers apply online or via WhatsApp and get a
decision in minutes. They've also raised $564M and, as at Dec 2020, they have
reached a $1.75B valuation.

#### Why Creditas works aka Sao Paulo =/= Lagos

Brazil is not Nigeria and Creditas works in part because of Brazil's unique
circumstances. Brazil has a relatively mature credit market, with $500B of debt
outstanding. However, the rates are one of the highest in the world and there's
little competition in their concentrated banking sector. Creditas' customer is
the top 15% of the population with wealth trapped in a house or car. Their ideal
customer takes out a loan from Creditas to pay off a higher balance loan from a
bank. Brazil also has an economic and regulatory environment that's favorable to
non-bank lending companies. ([Real Estate fiduciary
liens]("https://uk.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/6-501-2354?transitionType=Default&contextData=(sc.Default)#:~:text=Fiduciary%20lien%20(real%20estate%20fiduciary%20lien)")that
let you claim and sell collateralized property without court proceedings, Open
Banking, etc)

## What's different about Nigeria?

Today, most Nigerian banks provide mortgages, car loans or salary advance.
However, rates are high and the duration is only 30 days. For example, Fidelity
Bank "Fast Loan" for salary earners has a 2% monthly interest rate. To contrast,
Carbon, an unsecured fintech lender charges similar rates for twice the
duration, with no collateral required.

Regulation makes everything worse. For the Nigerians who have assets, you can't
use those as credit. Existing secured credit options focus on financing new
purchases, not securing credit for existing owned items. For many reasons, you
can't get the paperwork required to use a security as collateral, and when you
can the banks won't accept it. I haven't heard of a Nigerian bank to take an
existing car as collateral for a loan, but I'm willing to be wrong. Case in
point: Standard Chartered will only accept fixed deposit, mutual funds and
treasury bills [as
collateral]("https://www.sc.com/ng/invest/secured-wealth-lending/").

Also, credit penetration is low. Less than 6% of Nigerians have access to
credit, and this has implications for how big lenders can grow in Nigeria. In
developed markets, the primary way lenders assess credit worthiness is through
credit history. It becomes a chicken and egg problem. No credit in the past
equals no credit today. Unless, of course, someone figures out alternative
credit scoring (completely different story), or secured credit.

### IT LOOKS BLEAK, BUT WE MAY BE TURNING A CORNER

Some of the core problems are infrastructure related and Entrepreneurs are
addressing these problems. In the last few years, many companies have started
to [build for
entrepreneurs]("https://bankole.org/posts/#:~:text=More%20startups%20that%20build%20for%20entrepreneurs%C2%A0"),
for example solving problems in identity, payments, credit scoring and
infrastructure.

The [National Collateral Registry]("https://www.ncr.gov.ng/") promises to
enable movable assets as credit. If it works, borrowers can register movable
assets and lenders can confirm prior liens on the same asset. Unclear how
successful this has been so far.

## Lending depends on understanding Risk

In its simplest form, Lending depends on understanding a customer and being able
to measure that customer's unique risk perfectly. When lenders can't accurately
assess risk, the default is to assume everyone is risky. Most people only lend
to friends because they have some assessment of how likely they are to pay back
(credit scoring) and what their options for remediation are (zero to none).

When done right, secured loans are lower risk and should be treated accordingly.

For more on Africa's lending opportunity and the startups in this space. Listen
at afrobility.com/lending
