---
layout: post
author: Bankole
title: What\'s next for Africa\'s Telcos
discussion_id: 2022-05-06-whats_next_africa_telcos
comments: true
---

Africa's telcos are at once the best and worst investments in Africa tech. On
one hand, costs are high, upgrade cycles are shrinking, and there's competition
in every layer. But, they have the largest number of users and sell a product
that's [more important than
food]("https://outwardon.com/article/cell-phones-in-africa/"). Despite anaemic
growth, telco bulls believe the trajectory is about to change. That's unlikely.
The reality is somewhere in the middle.

Mobile internet access has transformed Africa. The African consumer is
"mobile-only" and more people are online than ever before. Lives have changed,
and fortunes have been made. The largest telcos have grown to hundreds of
millions of subscribers and more. They have become the largest companies where
they operate. For example, MTN is the largest taxpayer in Nigeria (both
[intentionally]("https://www.premiumtimesng.com/business/business-news/521525-mtn-paid-13-5-of-total-tax-collection-by-firs-in-2021-telecom-firm-says.html#:~:text=The%20telecom%20company%2C%20MTN%2C%20has,contributor%20to%20taxes%20in%20Nigeria.")
and
[unintentionally]("https://www.reuters.com/article/nigeria-mtn-group/mtn-close-to-paying-off-330-bln-naira-fine-in-nigeria-ncc-idUSL5N22X6SM")).
They create good jobs, and have an overwhelming distribution advantage.

All these haven't helped them recently. Their customers are rejecting high
margin voice and SMS, using free alternatives instead. Well-funded fintechs are
threatening to turn telcos to dumb pipes. Even worse, the upgrade cycles are
accelerating as customer needs are exploding. Telcos are making less money per
user as users expectations grow.Yet, there's still money in bringing people
online. Internet penetration is still less than the global average. 80% of
Africa's mobile connections are of the slower, less capable 2G/3G variety. But,
unless there are material changes in cost structure (e.g.,
[Jio]("http://afrobility.com/jio") or
[OpenRAN]("https://www.5gamericas.org/understanding-open-ran/#:~:text=Open%20Radio%20Access%20Networks%20(Open,interfaces%20for%20cellular%20wireless%20networks.")),
it's clear that the *next customer* will be less profitable for the telcos.
Africa's inequality is well-documented, and the wealthiest people are already
online. In a world of declining ARPUs, subscriber growth will not be enough. The
future is in value-added services. Besides customer growth, telcos have to
figure out how to get more from the customers they have now. Safaricom's M-Pesa
validates the opportunity in high-value financial services. Every telco is
asking "Beyond voice, data and phone, how do I get a share of my customer's
wallet?"

That's the space to watch. Every telco is rebranding from "Telco to TechCo".
MTN went as far as creating a new
[brand]("https://mybroadband.co.za/news/business-telecoms/435348-mtn-unveils-visual-rebrand.html").
And then there's mobile money in Africa's biggest, poorest and most unbanked
market, Nigeria.
[Smart]("https://www.pymnts.com/news/fintech-investments/2021/south-africa-telco-mtn-targets-5-billion-for-mobile-money-expansion/")[money]("https://techcrunch.com/2021/07/30/airtel-africa-gets-an-extra-200m-for-its-mobile-money-business-from-qia/")
believes this is an opportunity for the ages. On the back of this, MTN and
Airtel have raised money at eye-popping valuations.

Can Africa's telcos transform from government-protected oligopolies to nimble,
responsive technology companies? Can MTN provide a better experience for
Nigeria's SME's than any of the one million startups doing this? Time will tell,
but the telcos will have to win this battle to create any kind of value in the
long term.
